doc/FDROID.md, before:

# Description

This document describes how to update Status APK builds for the [F-Droid](https://f-droid.org/) Android application catalogue.

# Intro

In simplest terms F-Droid requires a YAML file that defines the steps necessary to create a universal unsigned APK build. This is achieved by submitting a new app versions into the `metadata/im.status.ethereum.yml` file in the [fdroiddata](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) repository.

The app builds defined this way run on servers that generate the unsigned APKs using the [fdroidserver](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroidserver) software. The [server setup](https://f-droid.org/en/docs/Build_Server_Setup/) is quite involved but is not necessary unless you want to run your own instance. Normally the applications defines in `fdroiddata` are built by servers maintained by [the F-Droid volunteers](https://f-droid.org/en/contribute/).

First release of Status app was merged in [fdroid/fdroiddata#7179](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata/-/merge_requests/7179).

:warning: __WARNING__: Once changes are commited into `fdroiddata` repo they __cannot be changed__.

# Adding New Versions

You can find our configuration file at [`metadata/im.status.ethereum.yml`](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata/-/blob/master/metadata/im.status.ethereum.yml)

The file defines all the necessary metadata like `SourceCode`, `Website`, or `License`, but the most important key is `Builds`, which looks like this:
```yml
Builds:
  - versionName: 1.12.0
    versionCode: 2021022512
    commit: cfb825a11b61d312af8cb5d36686af540c31f481
    sudo:
      - cd build/im.status.ethereum
      - make fdroid-build-env
    init: nix/scripts/setup.sh
    output: result/app-release-unsigned.apk
    scanignore:
      - android/build.gradle
    scandelete:
      - ios
    build: make release-fdroid BUILD_NUMBER=$$VERCODE$$
```
It contains a list of objects defining each release of the application. In order to add a new release simply copy a previous release object and adjust the following values:

* `versionName` - String version like `1.12.0`.
* `versionCode` - Android `versionCode`. Normally it is generated from timestamp at build time.
* `commit` - Specific commit SHA1 from which the given release was built.

The `versionCode` should be the same as the one in build that was uploaded to Play Store.
It can be found in the build logs or by using:
```
 > apkanalyzer manifest version-code StatusIm-Mobile-v1.12.0.apk
2021022512
```

At the bottom of the file you should also update the following keys:

* `CurrentVersion` - Same as the new `versionName` added
* `CurrentVersionCode` - Same as the `versionCode` added

Then submit a merge request to the [fdroid/fdroiddata](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) repository.

:warning: __WARNING__: Currently GitLab PR builds will fail due to running as `root` instead of `vagrant` and failing to install Nix.

# Checking Builds

The simplest way to test if the app builds via F-Droid is to use the Docker image:
https://gitlab.com/fdroid/docker-executable-fdroidserver

Which is available under `registry.gitlab.com/fdroid/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest`.

Because we use Nix to build the mobile app we need to slightly modify the image with this `Dockerfile`:
```Dockerfile
FROM registry.gitlab.com/fdroid/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest
ARG BUILDER_UID=1000
ENV BUILDER_USER=vagrant
RUN useradd -u $BUILDER_UID $BUILDER_USER
RUN mkdir -m 0755 /nix /home/$BUILDER_USER \
 && chown -R $BUILDER_USER /nix /home/$BUILDER_USER
```
Build it using:
```
docker build --build-arg=BUILDER_UID=$UID -t statusteam/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest .
```
Then clone the [fdroiddata](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) and [fdroidserver](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroidserver) repos and use it to test the build of a specific Status Android app version: `1.12.0`
```
git clone https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroidserver
git clone https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata
docker run --rm \
  -u $UID:$GID -e USER=vagrant \
  -v $PWD/fdroiddata:/repo \
  -v $PWD/fdroidserver:/fdroidserver \
  statusteam/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest \
  build im.status.ethereum
```
We have to create a user and specify the UID because Nix cannot run as `root` and that is the default user for the F-Droid Docker image. By adding our own user and setting the UID we also make it possible to mount folders like `fdroiddata` and `fdroidserver`.

You can specify a `--verbose` flag for `build` command for additional information.
You can provide `--storage-opt size=30G` flag if Docker complains about running out of space.

You should also run `lint` and `rewritemeta` for the App ID to verify and fix the YAML metadata formatting.

# Details

The original research was done in [#8512](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/issues/8512).

Normally F-Droid server wants to run Gradle itself, but we do not specify the `gradle` key in order to run `make release-fdroid` ourselves in `build` step. We also add `android/build.gradle` to `scanignore` to avoid F-Droid trying to use Gradle directly.

Once the PR is merged it may take a few days for the F-Droid server farm to build and deploy the new version to their site and app. You can look up the current state of builds [here](https://f-droid.org/wiki/index.php?title=Special:RecentChanges&days=7&from=&hidebots=0&hideanons=1&hideliu=1&limit=500) and look for your App ID and a `deploy` change after it.

# F-Droid Build

F-Droid requires submitted applications to be free of non Open Source software. For this reason we need to exclude certain Google libraries at build time.

This is achieved by setting `GOOGLE_FREE=1` in the `.env.release` file. This affects two things:

1. [Clojure code conditional](../src/status_im/acquisition/core.cljs) which stops use of `get-referrer`.
2. [Gradle build configuration](../android/app/build.gradle) by excluding Google libraries.

Both are affected by the `.env` file and both are required.

Commit message:

Add fdroid script
This commit adds a script to create a release PR for fdroid.

The two input parameters are the username on gitlab and the link to the apk.

Bash code is horrendous but tested and seems to be working.

Signed-off-by: Jakub Sokołowski <jakub@status.im>

doc/FDROID.md, after:

# Description

This document describes how to update Status APK builds for the [F-Droid](https://f-droid.org/) Android application catalogue.

# Intro

In simplest terms F-Droid requires a YAML file that defines the steps necessary to create a universal unsigned APK build. This is achieved by submitting a new app versions into the `metadata/im.status.ethereum.yml` file in the [fdroiddata](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) repository.

The app builds defined this way run on servers that generate the unsigned APKs using the [fdroidserver](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroidserver) software. The [server setup](https://f-droid.org/en/docs/Build_Server_Setup/) is quite involved but is not necessary unless you want to run your own instance. Normally the applications defines in `fdroiddata` are built by servers maintained by [the F-Droid volunteers](https://f-droid.org/en/contribute/).

First release of Status app was merged in [fdroid/fdroiddata#7179](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata/-/merge_requests/7179).

:warning: __WARNING__: Once changes are commited into `fdroiddata` repo they __cannot be changed__.

# Adding New Versions

There are two ways - automated and manual - described below.

## Automated

#### Requirements:

- GitLab account
- Forked copy of the [`fdroiddata`](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) repo
- Link to the release published

#### Steps

1. First checkout the branch/commit you want to release
    ```
    git checkout release/1.12.x
    ```
2. Run the F-Droid PR script
    ```
    make fdroid-pr \
        USERNAME=cammellos \
        RELEASE_LINK=https://releases.status.im/StatusIm-Mobile-v1.12.0-cfb825-universal.apk
    ```

This will update the file, commit and push to the [`fdroiddata`](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) repo. Then you can create a PR from the GitLab interface.

## Manual

You can find our configuration file at [`metadata/im.status.ethereum.yml`](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata/-/blob/master/metadata/im.status.ethereum.yml)

The file defines all the necessary metadata like `SourceCode`, `Website`, or `License`, but the most important key is `Builds`, which looks like this:
```yml
Builds:
  - versionName: 1.12.0
    versionCode: 2021022512
    commit: cfb825a11b61d312af8cb5d36686af540c31f481
    sudo:
      - cd build/im.status.ethereum
      - make fdroid-build-env
    init: nix/scripts/setup.sh
    output: result/app-release-unsigned.apk
    scanignore:
      - android/build.gradle
    scandelete:
      - ios
    build: make release-fdroid BUILD_NUMBER=$$VERCODE$$
```
It contains a list of objects defining each release of the application. In order to add a new release simply copy a previous release object and adjust the following values:

* `versionName` - String version like `1.12.0`.
* `versionCode` - Android `versionCode`. Normally it is generated from timestamp at build time.
* `commit` - Specific commit SHA1 from which the given release was built.

The `versionCode` should be the same as the one in build that was uploaded to Play Store.
It can be found in the build logs or by using:
```
 > make shell TARGET=android
 > apkanalyzer manifest version-code StatusIm-Mobile-v1.12.0.apk
2021022512
```

At the bottom of the file you should also update the following keys:

* `CurrentVersion` - Same as the new `versionName` added
* `CurrentVersionCode` - Same as the `versionCode` added

Then submit a merge request to the [fdroid/fdroiddata](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) repository.

:warning: __WARNING__: Currently GitLab PR builds will fail due to running as `root` instead of `vagrant` and failing to install Nix.

# Checking Builds

The simplest way to test if the app builds via F-Droid is to use the Docker image:
https://gitlab.com/fdroid/docker-executable-fdroidserver

Which is available under `registry.gitlab.com/fdroid/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest`.

Because we use Nix to build the mobile app we need to slightly modify the image with this `Dockerfile`:
```Dockerfile
FROM registry.gitlab.com/fdroid/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest
ARG BUILDER_UID=1000
ENV BUILDER_USER=vagrant
RUN useradd -u $BUILDER_UID $BUILDER_USER
RUN mkdir -m 0755 /nix /home/$BUILDER_USER \
 && chown -R $BUILDER_USER /nix /home/$BUILDER_USER
```
Build it using:
```
docker build --build-arg=BUILDER_UID=$UID -t statusteam/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest .
```
Then clone the [fdroiddata](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata) and [fdroidserver](https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroidserver) repos and use it to test the build of a specific Status Android app version: `1.12.0`
```
git clone https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroidserver
git clone https://gitlab.com/fdroid/fdroiddata
docker run --rm \
  -u $UID:$GID -e USER=vagrant \
  -v $PWD/fdroiddata:/repo \
  -v $PWD/fdroidserver:/fdroidserver \
  statusteam/docker-executable-fdroidserver:latest \
  build im.status.ethereum
```
We have to create a user and specify the UID because Nix cannot run as `root` and that is the default user for the F-Droid Docker image. By adding our own user and setting the UID we also make it possible to mount folders like `fdroiddata` and `fdroidserver`.

You can specify a `--verbose` flag for `build` command for additional information.
You can provide `--storage-opt size=30G` flag if Docker complains about running out of space.

You should also run `lint` and `rewritemeta` for the App ID to verify and fix the YAML metadata formatting.

# Details

The original research was done in [#8512](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/issues/8512).

Normally F-Droid server wants to run Gradle itself, but we do not specify the `gradle` key in order to run `make release-fdroid` ourselves in `build` step. We also add `android/build.gradle` to `scanignore` to avoid F-Droid trying to use Gradle directly.

Once the PR is merged it may take a few days for the F-Droid server farm to build and deploy the new version to their site and app. You can look up the current state of builds [here](https://f-droid.org/wiki/index.php?title=Special:RecentChanges&days=7&from=&hidebots=0&hideanons=1&hideliu=1&limit=500) and look for your App ID and a `deploy` change after it.

# F-Droid Build

F-Droid requires submitted applications to be free of non Open Source software. For this reason we need to exclude certain Google libraries at build time.

This is achieved by setting `GOOGLE_FREE=1` in the `.env.release` file. This affects two things:

1. [Clojure code conditional](../src/status_im/acquisition/core.cljs) which stops use of `get-referrer`.
2. [Gradle build configuration](../android/app/build.gradle) by excluding Google libraries.

Both are affected by the `.env` file and both are required.
